Context Framework Subsystem Architecture Description
====================================================

[width="30%"]
|================================
|Author   | Marius Vollmer
|Status   | Draft
|Version  | {sys:date +%Y-%m-%d}
|Approver | Olli Finni
|================================

Copyright (C) Nokia.  All rights reserved.

This material, including documentation and any related computer
programs, is protected by copyright controlled by Nokia. All rights
are reserved. Copying, including reproducing, storing, adapting or
translating, any or all of this material requires the prior written
consent of Nokia. This material also contains confidential
information, which may not be disclosed to others without the prior
written consent of Nokia.

Nokia is a registered trademark of Nokia. Other company and product
names mentioned herein may be trademarks or tradenames of their
respective owners.


Introduction
------------

The Context Framework, part of the Data Domain, provides a uniform,
high level API to numerous context properties of the device.  While
many of these context properties are available without the context
framework, each of them has its own specific way of accessing it.  The
context framework collects them all behind a uniform API, and
applications thus have easy access to all of the context properties.

The following lists some typical context properties:

- Connectivity status of the device; whether it is connected to the
  Internet and by what means.

- Location; the name of the current city.

- Builtin sensors; orientation in space.

- Current use; idle, plays media, web browsing.

- Combined properties; current weather based on location and online
  weather database.

More concretely, the information in the status bar of a device is
provided exclusively by the Context Framework.

Applications access context properties by using the +ContextProperty+
class that is implemented in api:libcontextsubscriber.

The context framework is modular: context properties from multiple
independent components are directly combined in the
+libcontextsubscriber+ API and applications can access them without
needing to know who is ultimately providing them.

A component that wants to directly provide context properties needs to
implement the relevant interfaces defined by the context framework.
Currently, the only supported way to do that is to use the
api:libcontextprovider library.

In addition to information from multiple sources, the context
framework is a provider of context properties itself: there is a
_context daemon_ that collects information from low-level and legacy
interfaces.  This context daemon is a good default location for
implementing context properties and for absorbing properties from
existing subsystems that have aqcuired them for historical reasons and
would rather get rid of them.

The concrete list of properties is ultimately defined by their
providers, but the context framework is the central authority: the
`official' list of context properties of the Maemo platform is defined
and documented by the context framework.

To summarize, the context framework contributes value to the Maemo
platform in the following ways:

- It implements and documents a high-level, uniform API to a set of
  context properties that are provided by multiple components.

- It defines and documents the concrete list of properties of the
  Maemo platform.  This includes harmonizing the context ontology with
  other industry efforts.

- It implements context properties that do not naturally belong to
  other subsystems and coordinates the implementation of context
  properties that do belong in specific subsystems.

- It provides a debugging and exploration tool for inspecting and
  controlling context properties.

Thus, the Context Framework does not drive the behavior of the system,
it only provides the information that is needed for other components
to decide for themselves.  To makes this reasonably easy, the context
properties are at a high level of abstraction and express the coarse
grained states of the device.  For example, the properties tell you
whether it is completely idle, in passive use playing some media, or
in active use.  They don't give a real-time view of CPU load.

Architecture
------------

Concepts
~~~~~~~~

Context properties are collected from all providers that have
registered themselves with the
link:context-providers.html[+context-providers+] interface.  For each
provider, this registration information includes the list of its
properties with type information and a short description for each, and
the D-Bus bus name where the provider can be reached.  Providers can
be both on the session and on the system bus, and the registration
information indicates which bus it is.

This registration information is read by the +libcontextsubscriber+
library and used by its +ContextProperty+ class to connect a requested
property name to the right bus name.

The registration information is compiled into a _cache_ that is
optimized for use by +libcontextsubscriber+.  When the set of
registered properties changes, the cache is recompiled by a command
line utility provided by the context framework.  This will then
trigger all libcontextsubscriber clients to reload the registry
information, and existing +ContextProperty+ instances to be updated.

When providers are installed from packages, recompilation of the cache
happens automatically.  _Triggers_ in the Context Framework packages
are used to run the command line utility at the right times.

The +libcontextsubscriber+ library gracefully handles start, stop and
restart of providers. During system startup some applications may
start to use the Context Framework before all providers are
available. Properties become dynamically available as providers become
available, and removed when providers are no longer available.

Communication between a +ContextProperty+ and the provider happens
using a private D-Bus interface.  This interface allows for bulk
retrieval of property values, bulk subscriptions, and bulk change
notification.

The values of properties are represented to clients as a +QVariant+
value.  Properties can have a special _null_ value when they are not
available, either because they are not provided by any provider, or
because the provider is not able to deliver a value.

It is expected that eventually the statusbar plugins, such as the
battery charge monitor and the connectivity indicators, exclusively
use the context properties to retrieve the information they display.

Context providers need to implement the private D-Bus interface.  This
is done with the api:libcontextprovider library.  This library is used
by the context daemon itself, which can serve as an extended example.

The Connectivity Framework and the Sensor Framework are expected to be
context providers as described above.  Additional context properties,
such as those related to the Location Framework, are implemented by
the _context daemon_ contained in the Context Framework.

The +contextd+ Context Daemon will implement all context properties
that don't have a native provider.  It will at least implement
properties for the information contained in HAL and for location
related information.  It is expected that +contextd+ runs the
necessary reverse geocoding operations at a reasonable frequency.  It
will also perform Content Framework queries to retrieve the values of
certain properties.

If necessary for security reasons, the +contextd+ might need to be
split into multiple instances.


System context
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The context framework decouples context subscribers from context
providers.

[dotty,fig3.png]
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
digraph G {

  graph [size="8,100"];
  node [shape=box, style=filled, fontsize=11];
  edge [fontsize=11];


  "Application 1" -> "Context Framework"
  "Application 2" -> "Context Framework"
  "Statusbar plugin" -> "Context Framework"
  "Central Policy" -> "Context Framework"

  "Context Framework" -> "Connectivity" [dir="back"]
  "Context Framework" -> "Location Framework"
  "Context Framework" -> "HAL"
  "Context Framework" -> "Sensor Framework" [dir="back"]

}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Structural view
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following figure summarizes the components of the Context
Framework.

[dotty,fig4.png]
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
digraph G {

  graph [size="8,100"];
  node [shape=box, style=filled, fontsize=11];
  edge [fontsize=11];

  { rank=source
    app [label="<<process>>\n\napplication"];
  }

  subgraph cluster0 { 
    label="Context Framework"

    registry [label="<<XML documents>>\n\n/usr/share/context-providers/"];
    cache [label="<<CDB file>>\n\ncache.cdb"];
    libsub [label="<<library>>\n\nlibcontextsubscriber"];
    update [label="<<utility>>\n\nupdate-context-providers"];
    libprov [label="<<library>>\n\nlibcontextprovider"];
    contextd [label="<<process>>\n\ncontextd"];

    commander [label="<<utility>>\n\ncontext-commander"];
    corepros [label="<<XML document>>\n\ncore properties", shape=note];

    // update -> registry [label="<<read>>"]
    // update -> cache [label="<<write>>"]
    registry -> update [label="<<read>>", dir="back"]
    cache -> update [label="<<write>>", dir="back"]

    libsub -> libprov [label="<<D-Bus>>"]
    libsub -> registry [label="<<read>>"]
    libsub -> cache [label="<<read>>"]
    libprov -> contextd [label="<<link>>", dir="back"]
  }

  {
    rank=sink
    props [label="<<XML document>>\n\nicd2-props.xml", shape=note];
    icd2 [label="<<process>>\n\nicd2"];
    libgeo [label="<<library>>\n\nlibgeo"];
    libhal [label="<<library>>\n\nlibhal"];
  }

  app -> libsub [label="<<link>>"]

  registry -> props [dir="back"]
  contextd -> libgeo [label="<<link>>"]
  contextd -> libhal [label="<<link>>"]
  libprov -> icd2 [label="<<link>>", dir="back"]
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are two fundamental options for exporting information via the
context framework:

- The context daemon can use existing platform interfaces, such as
  HAL, to collect this information, process it, and export it as a
  context property.
  +
  This applies to: HAL, Location subsystem, Kernel.

- The principal producer of the information, such as the +icd2+ daemon
  in the Connectivity subsystem, can use the libcontextprovider API
  and export the information directly to applications without using
  the context daemon as a middle man.
  +
  This applies to: Sensor Framework, possibly Connectivity subsystem
  (needs agreeement), possibly Telephony subsystem (needs agreement)


Provided Interfaces 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.+libcontextsubscriber+

A C++ API for listening to context properties.

link:libcontextsubscriber[Documentation]

.+libcontextprovider+

A C++ and C API for providing values of context properties.

link:libcontextprovider[Documentation]

.+context-properties+

The canonical list of context properties in the Maemo platform.  When
a context property from the list is available, it must conform to its
description there.

link:context-properties.html[Documentation]

.+context-providers+

The interface to register providers of context properties.  A provider
must use the api:libcontextprovider API.

link:context-providers.html[Documentation]



Development support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

No special features are needed in the Context Framework components to
make them work in a Scratchbox environment.  Availability of
individual properties depends on the ability of their providers to run
in Scratchbox.  The +contextd+ Context Daemon runs but might not be
able to provide all properties.

The Context Framework provides a graphical tool called the Context
Commander to watch all available context properties.  This can be used
to test context providers during development.

In addition, the Context Commander can be used to force context
properties of selected applications to arbitrary values.  This can be
used to test the reaction of applications to context changes.

The Context Commander runs on the device and either show its UI on the
device itself or exports it to an external X11 server.  This way, the
testing can be done without disturbing the display of the device
itself.

When started, the Context Commander takes control of all subscribers
with their cooperation: when the
"org.freedesktop.ContextKit.Commander" name appears on the session
D-Bus, all ContextProperty instances redirect their subcription
requests to it.

There are vague ideas about integrating the Context Commander into
Eclipse.

Licenses
~~~~~~~~

The components of the Context Framework will be developed publically,
under the umbrella of the freedesktop.org organization.  All source
code is licensed with LGPL 2.1, including the daemon and context
commander.

Non-free source code can safely interact with the Context Framework
components.

User Data, Settings, and Configurability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Context Framework does not store user data and is not
configurable.

Configurability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

See above.

Packages
~~~~~~~~

.+contextkit+

Languages:: C, C++, Vala

License:: LGPL 2.1

Provided interfaces:: libcontextsubscriber, libcontextprovider, context-providers, context-properties, 

Used interfaces:: libdbus, libgee, libglib, libcdb, libqt4-dbus, libqt4-xml, libqtcore4

Binary packages::
 libcontextsubscriber0, libcontextsubscriber0-dbg, libcontextsubscriber-dev, libcontextsubscriber-doc,
 libcontextprovider0, libcontextprovider0-dbg, libcontextprovider-dev, libcontextprovider-doc,
 contextkit, contextkit-doc, context-dbg

Sources:: https://dvcs.projects.maemo.org/git/?p=ContextKit

.+context-commander+

Languages:: C++

License:: LGPL 2.1

Provided interfaces:: none

Used interfaces:: libcontextsubscriber, libqt4-dbus, libqt4-gui, libqt4-core

Binary packages:: context-commander

Sources:: https://dvcs.projects.maemo.org/git/?p=ContextCommander

.+context-provider-example+

Languages:: C

License:: LGPL 2.1

Provided interfaces:: Context.Example.* properties.

Used interfaces:: libcontextprovider, sysfs files for accelerometer and ambient light sensor

Binary packages:: context-provider-example

Sources:: https://dvcs.projects.maemo.org/git/?p=ContextProviderExample

.+context-subscriber-example+

Languages:: C++

License:: LGPL 2.1

Provided interfaces:: none.

Used interfaces:: Context.Example.* properties, libcontextsubscriber, libqt4-gui, libqt4-core

Binary packages:: context-subscriber-example

Sources:: https://dvcs.projects.maemo.org/git/?p=ContextSubscriberExample

Performance
-----------

General
~~~~~~~

The Context Framework makes no real-time guarantees and does not rely
on any.

It is careful not to cause significant additional communication that
wouldn't be needed anyway to communicate contextual information to the
interested parties.

We expect 5 to 10 providers, about 20 subscribers, each subscribed to
an average of 5 properties.  Property values can become arbitrarily
big, but are expected to be mostly small, in the order of 10 bytes.
The occasional big property value is expected to change
correspondingly infrequently.

Memory
~~~~~~

|========================================================================================
| OneNAND  | All files are stored on the OneNAND, in their FHS mandated places | 200 KiB
| eMMC     | Not used | 0
| RAM/Idle | A couple of bytes per subscription plus a couple more per provided property | 10 KiB
| RAM/Peak | The biggest property values might reach a KiB  | 100 KiB
|========================================================================================

Runtime
~~~~~~~

The Context Framework allows subscribers and providers to directly
connect to each other (incurring only the usual D-Bus daemon
overhead).  Context properties are expected to change only
infrequently and providers are urged to throttle the rate of change.

Power consumption
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Providers of context properties know at any time whether someone in
the system is subscribed to them.  This allows them to avoid expensive
operations for producing values that are not needed.

The documentation for subscribers urges them to take the cost of
producing property values into consideration.  The subscriber API
offers an easy way to temporarily suspend a subscription.

Security Impact
---------------

Different context properties might need to have different access
restrictions.  A context provider can implement these access
restriction in whatever way works, but should preferrably use the
existing features of the Security Framework.

The Security Framework can control access per D-Bus bus connection.
Thus, a given context provider should only implement properties with
the same access rights and leave it to the Security Framework to allow
or disallow connections to the provider as a whole.

The Context Daemon needs to follow the same rules, of course.

Open Items
-----------

- The D-Bus interface needs to be reviewed and maybe redesigned.  It
  might make sense to use one object path per property instead of one
  object path per subscriber like we do now.

- Integration with Content Framework needs to be addressed.  Snapshots
  of the current context need to be imported into the content database
  (as document tags, say) and content queries might be run
  periodically to provide contextual information (such as the ten most
  recently accessed documents).


Appendices
----------

The Context Framework for Context Providers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The advantages of the Context Framework for application writers should
be clear: they can access a rich set of useful contextual information
with a simple API.

The ultimate providers of this information, however, might feel that
the context framework itself does not add significant value: after
all, they already implement APIs to access all that information
anyway.  Hooking into the Context Framework means a duplication of
effort and the requirement to express everything as a value (instead
of a general query/response API) might be unwelcome.

However, the unified API and central maintenance of the list of core
properties carries a lot of value:

- It makes using more contextual information trivial once you have
  used your first property.

- It makes it possible to expose present and future context
  information in all kinds of places with a single effort.  Once the
  context framework has been integrated into the Web runtime, into
  Python, or into any language that people care about, no additional
  effort is needed by anyone to track future developments of the
  context properties.

- It decouples context providers from consumers.  The context
  framework makes it possible to move the implementation of a property
  from one component to another without having to restart the
  consumers.

- It makes it worthwhile to develop sophisticated tools such as the
  context commander and support for easy automated testing of context
  subscribers and providers.

- It might allow some context providers to exit the "API business"
  altogether.
+
If a piece of information is available in a corner of the system but
needed somewhere else, it is only human to see this as a nuisance
and cobble together a few D-Bus methods to access that information.
+
The context framework provides a good alternative in those cases.

It is thus our opinion that the context framework provides enough
value to justify pushing it into other peoples subsystems, even if
that means duplicated efforts.

Moreover, the effort needed to integrate with the context framework is
low.

Relation to Policy Engine
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The central policy engine is the component in the Maemo platform that
decides system global behavior and controls the various distributed
enforcement points accordingly.  This job will likely be done by
OHMng.

The central policy engine can be both a subscriber to and provider of
context properties.  The policy engine will base its decisions
(partly) on the current values of context properties and will publish
(part of) its decisions as context properties.

Most facts that need to be gathered as input for the policy engine can
be communicted to it via the context framework.  If necessary,
non-public context properties can be defined that (while visible to
everyone who knows where to look) are not maintained as part of the
list of core properties.

Decisions of the policy engine can be communicated to cooperating
applications and potentially even to enforcement points.  The set of
values representable as context properties is quite rich so that
hopefully all facts and decisions can be represented with them.

