.TH context-listen 1 May-29-2009
.SH NAME
context-listen
- a simple test client to listen to changes in context properties from different providers.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B context-listen\fR [\fIPROPERTY\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
context-listen will listen for changes in the properties and notify
the user about them. At least one property has to be given. In order
to find the appropriate provider for each of the properties
context-listen reads the ./cache.cdb or if it doesn't
exist then all the XML files in the present directory.  Check
libcontextprovider documentation for the format of these XML files and
how to convert them to a cdb cache. Send EOF on stdin to terminate the
running context-listen.
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.TP 8
CONTEXT_CLI_DISABLE_TYPE_CHECK
when defined context-listen will not croak about type mismatch
between the expected and actual type.
.TP 8
CONTEXT_CLI_IGNORE_COMMANDER
when defined context-listen will become immune to the commander,
i.e. it will not be affected by context-commander at all.
.TP 8
CONTEXT_PROVIDERS
may define a directory containing the provider descriptor cdb or XML
files. If it is not set, a compiled-in registry prefix path will be used (usually
/usr/share/contextkit/providers).
.SH ARGUMENTS
context-listen takes a list of properties as arguments.
Properties are dot separated names, like Context.Location.Latitude.
Obviously a property have to be provided by some provider to be any useful.
.SH COMMAND LINE INTERFACE
context-listen can be commanded on its standard input, the available
commands can be seen at startup on stderr.  All debugging/error messages
are directed to stderr.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP 8
context-provide my.test.provider int mun.testi.property 42
Creates a test provider with a single int property. Keep this running.
.TP 8
context-listen mun.testi.property
starts context-listen listening for changes in the
property 'mun.testi.property' from the
provider 'my.test.provider'. This should be running in the same
directory (from an other terminal) or CONTEXT_PROVIDERS should be set
accordingly.
.TP 8
set('mun.testi.property', 59)
The above command typed in the first terminal running context-provider
will change the property and the change will be visible in the second
terminal running context-listen.
.SH SEE ALSO
context-provide(1)
