.TH new-context-provide 1 Sep-27-2009
.SH NAME
new-context-provide
- A tool to debug and inspect applictions using the context framework.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B new-context-provide [--silent] [busname][:bustype]
.SH DESCRIPTION
new-context-provide is an interactive tool to set (provide) properties of the context framework. It can be used to simulate an actual provider or debug applications built with the context framework. When launched, the tool presents a simple console where commands can be issued to provide new keys and set their values.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP 13
add KEY TYPE
adds a key named KEY with the given TYPE to the list of provided properties. This has to be called before an attempt is made to set a key value. TYPE can be: STRING, INTEGER, TRUTH, DOUBLE. Example: "add Battery.Status INTEGER".
.TP 13
KEY=VALUE
sets a given KEY value to the new VALUE. This is a standard setter. Example: "Battery.Status=99". 
.TP 13
sleep INTERVAL
sleeps and blocks the main loop for the given amount of seconds. Example: "sleep 10".
.TP 13
dump
dumps the currently added properties to a xml .context file defined by the CONTEXT_PROVIDE_REGISTRY_FILE environment variable. If the variable is not defined, it creates 'context-provide.context' file in the current directory.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 13
--silent
Do not print anything when launched.
.TP 13
busname
the bus name to use. Properties set inside the program will be set as propeties of a service registered on the given busname. If no busname is specified, a commande busname is used by default: org.freedesktop.ContextKit.Commander .
.TP 13
bustype
"session" or "system" - as seen in dbus. Session bus is used by default.
